Two clinical psychologists, Pauline Rose Clance and Suzanne Imes, first identified and named the phenomenon back in 1978. With imposter syndrome, a person doesn’t feel confident or competent, regardless of what they achieve. They don’t experience the joy of success because they are always waiting for their inadequacy and fraudulence to come to light.

Although Clance and Imes originally defined imposter syndrome to describe a condition they observed in professional women, research shows that men and women can equally suffer from imposter syndrome. 

But humility is good, right? It’s just realistic to acknowledge that no person knows everything. The world does change quickly, and problems or situations people face might be more complex than they seem at first. Yet, imposter syndrome is different from a healthy dose of caution of open-mindedness. 

Humility and caution stem from an accurate assessment of one’s own capabilities against a complex situation.

The imposter phenomenon, on the other hand, stems from a sense of inadequacy in the environment despite objectively being competent.  It is notable in that it isn't about assessing the situation but about assessing themselves. They feel more inadequate than others facing the same complex situation, such that they don’t belong there at all. 

Imposter syndrome can cause people to feel a sense of time running out. It’s as if people have been putting on an act and they can’t keep the act up much longer. This is despite all evidence to the contrary. Remember, people often have these thoughts and feelings after achieving and overcoming obstacles throughout their lives. Why?

Many high achievers reach a point in their career where they feel like they are unable to keep going. 

Maybe they can’t keep going at the same rate as they have been, and that feels shameful. The shame makes people suffer alone and in silence. People don’t realize how many others suffer from imposter syndrome because no one wants to admit it out loud. 
What causes imposter syndrome?
Imposter syndrome is a cognitive distortion. It causes people to doubt their skills and accomplishments. They doubt others’ high regard for them. They doubt their own history and track record. 

But where do this doubt and distortion come from? Although it can drag at a person's mental health, imposter syndrome isn’t an official psychological condition and it has a variety of causes. Research has shown that imposter syndrome comes from a combination of factors:  

Family environment. Growing up, parents or other family members might have put outsized emphasis on achievement or been overly critical. 

Example: Sam rushed home to tell her parents she received a 98 on her 8th-grade math test. She studied the terms every night for a week and is very proud of herself. Sam's parents always brag to their friends about her accomplishments. When Sam excitedly tells her parents the good news, they say, “What happened? Why didn’t you get a 100?”

Social pressures. Being part of a social circle or group where approval or worth seems to be explicitly connected to achievement.

Example: Last quarter, Everett received his invitation to the monthly executive dinner immediately after surpassing his sales record and was the hero of the sales team. This quarter, his numbers are down. The executive dinner rolls around and the invitation is nowhere to be found. It's like he doesn't exist. 

Sense of belonging. Part of imposter syndrome is the fear of being found out and cast out. 

Any circumstance, even in the past, that made a person feel different or excluded from the group — language, ethnicity, gender, socio-economic status, religion, or physical or learning differences — can fuel the imposter phenomenon. The person can carry that persistent sense of not belonging long after the circumstance is resolved.

Example: At the weekly staff meeting, Tyler's manager calls on everyone else, despite having his hand up. When he finally calls on Tyler, with two minutes remaining, he avoids eye contact and dismisses Tyler's comment. None of Tyler's coworkers respond or acknowledge his insight. Tyler feels excluded and wonders if it’s because the new shirt he got on clearance looks cheap. He grew up wearing hand-me-downs and the team can probably tell he's not one of them.

Personality. Some personality types are more linked to internalizing feelings of pressure, doubt, and failure. Times of stress or transition, even unrelated to work, can make it worse.

Example: Campbell has a highly introverted personality. She tends to process her feelings internally rather than work through them by communicating outwardly. When Campbell internalizes negative emotions, she ruminates. This habit of negative self-talk causes her to belittle her achievements.

The effects of imposter syndrome make it worth addressing. The feelings of anxiety and inadequacy can lead people to avoid challenges or opportunities that would let them grow and shine. 

People may not seek out or fully explore useful relationships at work or school. Even if they do, the internal struggle necessitates a lot of energy. It can lead to frustration, shame, depression, and self-confidence. 

Left unchecked, imposter syndrome has a negative impact on people’s relationships, work, as well as job and life satisfaction. The effects can be worse for women and underrepresented groups. 
Characteristics of imposter syndrome
We all doubt ourselves sometimes. So you might be wondering what imposter syndrome feels like. Here are the most common characteristics of imposter syndrome:

Self-doubt
Undervaluing contributions
Attributing success to external factors
Sabotaging self-success
Setting unrealistic expectations
Continuous fear of not living up to expectations
Burnout
Self-doubt
A lack of self-worth and self-efficacy results in persistent feelings of anxiety regarding their ability to succeed. Success at work is viewed as an unattainable and risky goal, not a reality that can be achieved with focus and dedication. 

Undervaluing contributions
People experiencing imposter syndrome undermine the worth of their achievements, which results in a persistent sense of incompetency. 

Attributing success to external factors
Imposter syndrome causes people to credit their achievements to situational factors beyond their control. 

When team members offer positive feedback in the form of praise, raises, or promotion, people will struggle to accept responsibility for their success. Instead, they may attribute the positive impact they created to chance, coincidence, good luck, or the contributions of their coworkers. 

Sabotaging self-success
Imposter syndrome reinforces feelings of inefficacy. It pushes people to go out of their way to make poor or risky decisions. 

The imposter phenomenon causes people to experience a fear of success. They believe it is unattainable no matter how hard or often they try to attain it — success isn't meant for them.

Imposter syndrome also results in people psyching themselves out. They tell themselves their contributions will be sloppy, insufficient, or purposeless. This self-doubt can cause them to apply less effort, attention, creativity, and persistence until it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. 

Setting unrealistic expectations
Imposter syndrome creates the sensation that our best isn’t enough. It pushes people to set unrealistically high standards to accommodate for feeling inadequate when accomplishing realistic, timely, complex, and challenging goals.

Continuous fear of not living up to expectations
No matter what goals people set, imposter syndrome negates their ability to achieve them. It causes people to feel as if they are not able to fulfill expectations they set and others set for them, despite their best efforts. They perceive these expectations as a burden they cannot shake instead of a challenge they’re excited to overcome. 

Burnout
To overcome a sense of incompetence, people push themselves. They expend their energy quickly. Work starts to become more of a chore than a source of meaning and purpose, and they lose much of their passion for what they do.

5 types of imposter syndrome
Imposter syndrome comes in many forms. Dr. Valerie Young defines five types in her book: The Secret Thoughts of Successful Women: Why Capable People Suffer. Let’s explore these types, plus a couple more, below. 

In reality, people may find themselves fitting more than one type over time. See if you recognize yourself in any of these patterns of thought and behavior. This way, you can work to overcome them.

The perfectionist

The Superwoman/man/person

The Natural Genius

The Soloist

The Expert

1. The Perfectionist
As the name indicates, this type has to be sure everything gets done with perfection. Achieving an outcome or completing a task is never enough. 

The perfectionist is always hungry for more success, better outcomes, and higher prestige. Perfectionism results in feeling unsatisfied no matter how much hard work they do and ambitious goals they achieve.

Example: A manager is always asking a direct report for updates on the project progress. When she gets the progress report, she’s constantly telling them how to improve their process and how the projects must be done every step of the way.

Underlying emotion: fear of losing control

2. The Superwoman/man/person
This type thrives in showing off their ability to take on a lot of work in a short period of time. They are willing to work overtime to achieve the validation of their colleagues and managers. 

They are trying to prove that they are capable of handling anything.

Example: An individual contributor who takes her job very seriously and offers her time and support to her colleagues. She goes out of her way to take on work even during holidays or scheduled time off. She is happy to do the work, even on her own time.

Underlying emotion: fear of free time and taking time away from work for personal fulfillment

3. The Natural Genius
This type of imposter thrives on being so quick and slick in getting things done. They believe that they got it right the first time. Feedback cycles, critique, or rework is threatening — if they didn’t get it right, they failed. They put minimal effort into their work yet often succeed. 

This pattern of minimal effort and good results was likely there throughout their lives. They never have to put in the extra work, until they do. 

Example: A new accountant who just graduated top of his class always found that the classwork came easily. He never had to spend late nights studying for anything. He gets into the workplace and feels overwhelmed with the expectations. He’s not always able to get his calculations according to his manager’s satisfaction.

When his manager asks him to spend some time with his colleague to learn the process, he feels uncomfortable and insulted. He doesn’t need anyone to tell him how to do his work more than once.

Underlying emotion: shame of failing

4. The Soloist
Like the Natural Genius, this type is not interested in getting support from others to do their work. However, the soloist resents others altogether. The Soloist is not willing to ask for help, regardless of the situation. 

Asking for help can leave them vulnerable and expose what they don’t know or can’t do.  

Example: An HR Director has to present new organizational changes and reports to her C-suite. As the deadline approaches, she abruptly orders her team to gather up information in a specific way the C-suite wanted it. This creates some chaos for the team. She kept the information to herself until the last minute rather than sharing the requirements with her team because she thought that she would handle everything herself. Then she realized time was running out.

Underlying emotion: shame in asking for help

5. The Expert
“I must have all the credentials before I can even think of applying to this job.” This type of imposter feels the compulsive need to have all the knowledge and experience before even attempting the job. They may be critical of others around them who “work to learn” or take aspirational roles, while also not recognizing that certainty and having all of the answers isn’t expected. 

In a fast-changing environment, no one is an expert in what to do next.

Example: A scientist working on a new drug discovery feels compelled to fully understand the results before sharing them with the team. The experiment nears the end of its funding and timeline. The scientist has not yet shared the progress updates.

Then, team members are uncertain and become restless. Worse, two team members have relevant insights that could have built on the scientist’s results if they’d had a chance to work through them. With even more pressure is on the scientist now, because he is the expert in this process. 

Underlying emotion: fear of inadequacy 

There are two additional types of imposters that are equally important to consider.

Additional types of imposter syndrome
There are two additional types of imposters that are equally important to consider.

The Noticer
This type can’t be proud of their work or themselves because they immediately notice things that still aren’t perfect. Whether in a work product, a meeting or in the clothes they wear, the Noticer is forgiving of others but doesn't extend the same grace to herself. When a tough project ends, the Noticer feels relief, more deflated than elated. 

The Noticer is hyper-aware of the competition, real or imagined, and secretly believes that she will always miss the bar. 

Example: An account manager works with her team to prepare a working session with the client. The team works hard on it for several days, and the manager spends every night making it better. 

Despite changing direction more than once, they ultimately create a workshop that the client loves. The team celebrates but the manager can’t stop thinking about where her presentation was awkward and how much more charisma and comfort the other project lead had. 

Underlying emotion: fear of not belonging

The Discounter
The Discounter automatically rationalizes away evidence of their own competence, achievement, or high regard. “People think well of me because they really don’t know what they’re talking about.” This type of imposter doesn’t value or trust their network of supporters very much.

They doubt the quality or level of competition in any effort that they succeed at and are ashamed to share something that “anyone could have done.”   

Example: A newly-promoted Project Manager gives a well-received and engaging presentation on a planning process. Several peers congratulate him and thank him for making a formerly dreaded process more useful and relevant. Instead of feeling proud, he thinks about how no one values his group and how low their bar was — they were saying it was good, for their team.  