Superman is considered one of the most powerful characters in the DC Universe. He is so strong, in fact, that he has been nicknamed the “Man of Steel.” Yet, as strong as steel is, the alloy is still susceptible to rust, tarnish, or even being destroyed if met with enough force. The same can be said of Superman. Clark Kent’s invulnerability has been put to the test on multiple occasions, and he always seems to survive unscathed. Well, almost always. Over the course of his eighty-year history, Superman has encountered a handful of opponents capable of truly doing him physical harm. So who has actually killed Superman in DC Comics? The idea of killing Superman is not a new one. Superman’s arch-nemesis Lex Luthor would be the first to successfully “kill” him in 1961’s Superman #149. Fittingly entitled “The Death of Superman”, this imaginary tale finds Lex feigning reformation and then murdering the Man of Steel with a Kryptonite ray. Since Superman #149 is non-canonical, 1966’s Superman #188 is widely considered his first true death and is the sole appearance of Zunial the Murder Man and his Galaxy Crimeteers. This oddly named group of aliens rehearse their homicidal plans for Superman on a robot clone. Zunial succeeds in killing the real Supes, but the Superman robot sacrifices its life to revive its Kryptonian counterpart. Superman’s second true death would come at the hands of Count Crystal in the pages of 1977’s Justice League of America #145. In order to retain the powers of the demon Azgore, Count Crystal must kill the entire Justice League one by one. While Crystal manages to take down Superman, Hawkman, and the Phantom Stranger, he fails to kill the rest of the League, and Azgore eats his soul. Luckily, the Phantom Stranger is able to revive himself, Hawkman, and the Man of Tomorrow. While Luthor, Zunial, and Count Crystal were three of Superman’s first murderers, their actions had little lasting impact. Superman’s most important killers appeared in the wake of DC Comics’ reboot in 1985. It seems that every time DC Comics publishes a crossover series, Superman dies. In the pages of 1985’s Crisis on Infinite Earths, it is established that the Golden Age Superman and his younger counterpart are from two different versions of Earth. In the seventh issue of the 2006 sequel series Infinite Crisis, the Golden Age Earth-2 Superman is killed by the least likely person: A crazed Superboy-Prime beats Superman to death in an attempt to destroy the universe. Later, when Flashpoint reboots DC Comics yet again, a third Superman is created. This New-52 era Superman would die at the hands of Denny Swan, the Energy Superman, after being weakened by Kryptonite poisoning. While Superboy-Prime and Denny Swan left lasting impressions on the DC Universe, arguably Superman’s most life-shattering murderer appeared in the second story to be titled “The Death of Superman.” Superman was created in 1938 by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster. Siegel wrote Superman’s non-canon death in Superman #149, but other legendary creators such as Otto Binder, Curt Swan, Steve Englehart, Dan Jurgens, Jerry Ordway, and Geoff Johns would all take their best shots at killing the Man of Steel. Yet, Superman’s landmark murder would come as a fill-in story to replace the postponed Clark Kent/Lois Lane marriage event. What began as a joke by Ordway in the DC writer’s room would evolve into a cultural phenomenon. Superman: The Man of Steel #18 introduced Doomsday, a genetically engineered Kryptonian war-machine which mistakes Superman as its creator. Seven issues and six million copies later, Clark dies in Lois’ arms after fighting Doomsday to a standstill in Superman #75. The next day, Superman’s death made real-world newspapers. Perhaps human beings have a natural desire to see their deities die. The Egyptian god Set was killed by Osiris; the Japanese god Kagutsuchi was beheaded by Izanagi; in Christian tradition, Jesus was betrayed by Judas and crucified. Certainly, these stories have had a profound effect on the creators of the god-like Superman. Over the years, as Superman has become more and more powerful, his writers have had to find increasingly inventive means to bring him down to earth. What better way to humanize a hero than to write a compelling super-villain and see if the Man of Steel is mortal, after all?